doi: 10.54103/2465-0137/28394

ISSN 2465-0137 – Anno 2024 – vol. XXVIII (1)

Saggi

THE GREAT BOOK OF MUSIC OF AL FARABI –
A MEDIEVAL MODEL FOR A MUSICOTHEORETICAL RESEARCH
Prof. Ilia Mihaylov1
ORCID: 0009-0007-5551-3865
1
Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski” (02jv3k292)

Il Grande Libro della Musica di Al Farabi - Un modello medievale per la ricerca musicologica
Abstract
The Great Book of Music (Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir), by the Golden Age Islamic philosopher Al-Farabi,
is a X th. century treatise on music in Arabic. It consists of two parts, the first being an introduction in
which the definition of melody and its subdivisions, the origin of music, and some acoustic problems are
discussed. The second part is devoted to the specifics of musical instruments popular among Arabs, the
variety of rhythms, and the composition of melodies. Influenced by Pythagoras’ theory of harmonic relationships, Farabi gives us a detailed definition of music, reveals its categories, and describes the elements
from which a musical work is formed. The author systematically and subversively explains the importance
of induction, and supports his theory emphatically by evidence, asserting that many of the principles he
derives are acquired through sense experience, as in astronomy, optics, medicine, and other sciences.
Keywords: music, pedagogy, medieval, eastern, musico-theoretical, philosophy, induction, sensory experience
Sommario
Il Grande Libro della Musica (Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir), scritto dal filosofo islamico dell’età dell’oro Al-Farabi,
è un trattato sulla musica in arabo risalente al X secolo. Si compone di due parti: la prima è un’introduzione
in cui vengono discussi la definizione di melodia e le sue suddivisioni, l’origine della musica e alcuni problemi
acustici. La seconda parte è dedicata alle specificità degli strumenti musicali popolari tra gli arabi, alla varietà dei
ritmi e alla composizione delle melodie. Influenzato dalla teoria delle relazioni armoniche di Pitagora, Farabi ci
fornisce una definizione dettagliata della musica, ne rivela le categorie e descrive gli elementi che compongono
un’opera musicale. L’autore spiega in modo sistematico e sovversivo l’importanza dell’induzione e sostiene con
enfasi la sua teoria con prove concrete, affermando che molti dei principi da lui derivati sono acquisiti attraverso l’esperienza sensoriale, come nell’astronomia, nell’ottica, nella medicina e in altre scienze.
Parole chiave: musica, pedagogia, medievale, orientale, musicologia, filosofia, induzione, esperienza
sensoriale

© The Author(s)
Licensed under a Creative
Commons AttributionShareAlike 4.0 International

Published online: 15/10/2025

Ilia Mihaylov

1. INTRODUCTION
The works of the medieval scholar Al
Farabi1, devoted to music theory, have unfortunately been largely marginalized and underappreciated by European music media scholars.
Despite being one of the most influential theorists of Near Eastern music and the author
of outstanding commentaries on the works of
ancient Greek music theorists, these aspects of
his many writings remain in the shadow of his
philosophical works. This is probably because
of the hundred and sixty or so works attributed
to Farabi, only eight are about music, of which
four survive (Sawa, 1983-84: 3). Or because his
contributions to music theory are often entangled in legendary narratives that add a supernatural dimension to his talents as a musician. It is
said, for example, that he could make his listeners laugh, cry and lull them to sleep against their
will (Khallikan, 1868: 309).
Fig. 1: Image of al-Farabi from 1493 in Liber Chronicarum

1
Little is known about the life of the Muslim scholar Abu
Nasr Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Uzlag ibn Tarkhan al-Farabi (Al-Farabi). He was probably born in 870 in a place called
Farab or Farayb. Scholars disagree about his ethnic origin - some
claim he was Turkic, but more recent research indicates that he
was probably Persian. He moved to Baghdad; in 943 he went
to Syria (Damascus), and then to Egypt. He died in Damascus
around December 950 or January 951. Al-Farabi had two main
interests - philosophy (particularly logic) and music. His interest
in philosophy explains why he is known as the “Second Teacher”
(the first, of course, being Aristotle). A practicing musician, he is
believed to have played the oud masterfully.

26

Of Farabi‘s works devoted to music, this study
focuses on The Great Book of Music (Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir). It is considered one of the most
important, complex philosophical sections. Farabi
wrote his work for Abu Jaffar Muhammad al-Qasem Karaki, vizier to the caliph al-Razi (940 AD),
who wished to learn about the science of music
according to ancient Greek theorists. The author
agrees to his request, as he finds serious deficiencies
in the writings of ancient Hellas that were available
in Arabic translation. According to him, they were
due to the poor selection of the writings, the poor
translation from Ancient Greek into Arabic, and
the shortcomings he found in the writings of some
of his predecessors, the philosopher al-Kindi (800877) and the singer, composer, lutenist and theorist
Ishaq al-Mawsili (767-850) (Sawa, 1989:14).
Farabi was a logician and practicing musician
and his theory claimed to cut clear and open practice. He mainly expounds ancient Greek music theory, but also introduces his readers to those aspects
about music that are not applicable in the Middle
East. Since the vizier was not familiar with the art
and theory of music, Farabi explains music by borrowing terms, concepts, and paradigms from the
Greek sciences and modern disciplines such as
arithmetic, Euclidean geometry, Aristotelian logic,
architecture, civil and mechanical engineering, politics, Arabic grammar, phonology, prosody, poetics, rhetoric, and Qur‘anic studies (Sawa, 1990). In
addition to the Greek theories, he also describes
the musical practices of his time and origin, i.e., the
early Abbasid era of Iraq, Persia, Transjordan, and
those of the Umayyads of the early Islamic era in
Mecca, Medina, and Damascus (Sawa, 1989:14-17).

2. THE GREAT BOOK OF MUSIC
The Great Book of Music (Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir) exists in several manuscripts1, as well as in an
Arabic edition (Farmer,1965: 27-28; Sawa, 1989:
18-20; Shiloah, 1979: 104-07). It was later translated
into Hebrew by Joseph ben Judah ibn Aknin (lived
De Musica
ISSN 2465-0137 – Anno 2024, Vol. XXVIII (1)

THE GREAT BOOK OF MUSIC OF AL FARABI

c. 1150-1220) and into French by Baron Rudolf
d‘Erlanger (D‘Erlanger, 1930-59).2
The treatise is in two volumes. The first volume is
divided into two books, but this claim is misleading
and false. In fact, the first volume is divided into
three very clear parts, called by the author The Book
of Introduction (Part 1), The Book of the Elements (Part
2 or Book One) and The Book of the Instruments (Part
3 or Book Two). The second volume consists of
only one part, called by the author The Book of Composition (Part 4 or Third Book). Each of these books
includes two essays. Thus, there are a total of eight
narrative essays in four parts.
In the preface to The Great Book of Music,
Al-Farabi defines the motivation for its creation
as, „...the desire to know the art of Music as the ancients
knew it“ (D‘Erlanger, 1930:1).
He goes on to tell us that:
“To be a perfect theorist, in any science, three conditions are necessary: to know well all the principles,
to have the ability to deduce the necessary consequences and interrelationships from those principles
belonging to that science, to be able to oppose wrong
theories, and to analyze the opinions expressed
by other writers in order to distinguish right from
wrong” (D‘Erlanger, 1930:2).

Book of Introduction (Part 1) discusses and
outlines the basic musical principles and rules.
It consists of two essays. The first essay is an
introduction to the art of music and deals with
the philosophy of music, while the second essay
deals with the nature of musical science and elements of acoustics.
Contents of the topics (lectures) of the first essay:
Definition of melody; Theory and practice of
music; The instruments (Ch. 1, p. 5) - Disposition
For this study I use the only complete translation to date
into a European language, carried out by Baron D’Erlanger, to
whose great importance the last chapter of this presentation is
dedicated.
2

De Musica
Anno 2024 Vol. XXVIII (1) – ISSN 2465-0137

(placement) of music; Invention of melody
(Ch. 2, p. 8) - Different kinds of music produce different effects on the soul (Ch. 3, p. 13) Musical Talent: the Voice and the Playing of
Instruments (Ch. 4, p. 17) - The origin of music
(Ch. 5, p. 18) - The invention of instruments
(Ch. 6, p. 21) - The study of music (Ch. 7, p. 23)
- Theoretical science; The theory of the art of
music (Ch. 8, p. 24) - Judgment of feeling and
intelligence; Basic principles, what is „natural“
in music (Ch. 9, p. 30).
Contents of the topics (lectures) of the second essay:
Continuation of the previous paragraph:
„Natural“ sound sensitivity, harmony or consonance, sensations of discord (Ch. 1, p. 37) The search for „natural tones“; musical intervals; the octave (Ch. 2, p. 41) - The instruments
predestined to extract the „natural“ tones; the
Sahruda (Ch. 3, p. 42) - The Oud (Lute) - (Ch. 4
p. 44) - The grouping of notes, the scales (Ch. 5,
p. 49) - The basic intervals - octave, fifth and
fourth and tone (Ch. 6, p. 53) - The inervale,
„remainder“ or Lima (Ch. 7, p. 54) - Dividing the
fifth into three intervals, the genres (Ch. 8, p. 55) Discussion of the semitone, a ladder formed by
12 semitones (Ch. 9, p. 63) - Reasons for the pitch
of sounds (Ch. 10, p. 64) - Representing notes
by numbers, theoretical and practical ideas about
notes (Ch. 11, p. 65) - Consonants (Ch. 12, p. 67) Simple ratios; Producing, dividing, adding and
subtracting ratios (Ch. 13, p. 72).
Key ideas
The Book of Introduction discusses the basic
principles and rules for deriving them.
Every theoretical art consists of principles
and what follows from them. Thus, as in the
other arts, knowing music theory requires knowing its basic principles. Then one must know the
rules or generalities by which all these fundamental principles of the art are derived, since a
27

Ilia Mihaylov

complete mastery of them is also essential for
the theorist. Finally, these rules enable one to
determine exactly what the art of music consists in and what it does not consist in, as well as
the possibility of avoiding mistakes. This is how
one discovers the art of music and its character,
as well as the training appropriate for one who
would explore this art.
Book of Elements (Part 2) contains the second pair of essays from the Great Book of Music.
It is devoted primarily to acoustic principles and
the elements themselves. The crafts (ṣenāʿa) of
music are discussed, arranged according to the
three arts (fann). The first art includes basic theoretical elements such as acoustics, musical intervals, and melodic and rhythmic modes. Al-Farabi
reports that the Greeks, as well as early writers
in the Near East, limited their studies to this art
(Sawa, 1989:15).
Contents of the topics (lectures) of the first essay:
Principles of physics: The production of
sound; its transmission (Ch. 1, p. 80) - Tone;
definition; bodies that produce tones (Ch. 2,
p. 81) - Causes of pitches and leanings; causes
that we can measure and causes that we cannot
estimate; interrelationships between notes (Ch. 3,
p. 82) - Musical intervals: double octave, fourth,
fifth, tone; consonant and dissonant relationships;
major, middle, and minor intervals (Ch. 4, p. 86)
- Arithmetic rules for adding, dividing, subtracting intervals (Ch. 5, p. 93) - Diaphones(?), different kinds of consonant intervals: large and middle and symphonant and small or tangled (Ch. 6,
p. 100) - Genuses (Ch. 7, p. 101).
Contents of the topics (lectures) of the second essay:
Groups larger than a fifth; perfect group or
double octave (Ch. 1, p. 116) - Names of notes in
the group; fixed notes and mobile notes (Ch. 2,
p. 119) - Tonalities (Ch. 3, p. 129) - Mixing notes
and intervals; mixing groups and tonalities (Ch.
28

4, p. 136) - The evolution of melody by means
of notes (Ch. 5, p. 145) - Rhythm (ch. 6, p. 150) The construction of an instrument for the experimental verification of theory (ch. 7, p. 158) The finales of melodies (ch. 8, p. 160).
Main ideas
We have already seen that Al-Farabi describes
the first of the second pair of lectures in the Book
of Elements as dealing with the rules for deriving
tones, intervals, and the like, and these derivations are in fact made very clear in the course
of this lecture. The second essay is concerned
with the constituent parts of this art, and in
this connection Al Farabi often uses the expression „first principles“ (D‘Erlanger, 1930:115), for
example in describing the topics covered in
the second of the two essays on the elements
of music. Similarly, the two essays deal with the
„rudiments“ (ibid:162), i.e. the foundations of the
art of music, and we will encounter this second
term at the end of the second essay. However,
one has to know how to establish these basics
and this is done by means of rules. As Al-Farabi
explains at the beginning of the second essay
on the elements, these rules along with the „first
principles“ were the subject of the first essay on
the elements.
These are „the rules by which one derives tones
and intervals“ (ibid.:115), which, as we shall see,
are among the rudiments of the art of music.
Thus, the second pair of lectures in the Book of
Elements extracts all the elements and also presents rules for their use. In it, the author presents complex calculations of ratios between
tones and the size of intervals, gives directions
for adding and subtracting one interval from
another, and discusses the number and names of
notes in his system in comparison with that of
the ancient Greeks. But since this second pair
of lectures deals with more than just the elements and fundamentals themselves, the term
De Musica
ISSN 2465-0137 – Anno 2024, Vol. XXVIII (1)

THE GREAT BOOK OF MUSIC OF AL FARABI

„elements“ includes some of the more difficult
concepts whose detailed descriptions can allow
us to understand (only somewhat) these terminologies. The second lecture concludes with a set
of tables presenting the „blends of all the ‚genus‘ “
(ibid.:137-142) (types of phonemes, modes) and
lists complex calculations of notes, intervals, and
„tonalities“ in each group, as well as those of the
remaining notes in the group that are consonantal or dissonant.
Finally, in the Book of Elements we learn that in
composing a melody one selects notes from one
of the various groups, the genus. „A genus is a fourth
divided into three intervals“ (ibid:116). Their most
important distinguishing features are the particular
soundorder, „their composition“ of various possible
combinations of microintervals within the fourth,
fifth and octave. These are named and classified by
length and underlie large parts of his system.
The third pair of essays in The Book of
Instruments (Part 3) discusses musical instruments. In them, Farabi deals in detail with the
description of common musical instruments
and how they can produce the tonal systems discussed in the theory. Among these instruments
we see the oud (lute), the Bagdadian and Khorezian tumbur (pandora), the mezmar (flute, or reed
pipe), the sornai (oboe), the rabab (rebecca), the
mezafra (lyre), and the sanj (harp).
Contents of the topics (lectures) of the first essay:
The instruments used as a control experiment of the theory (Ch. 1, p. 164) – Description
of the lute, strings, fingerboard and frets; usual
tuning; octave repetitions of notes (Ch. 2, p.
165) – Implementation of intervals on the lute
(Ch. 3, p. 179) – Scale of the lute; “dynamis” and
“individual notes”; their number (Ch. 4, p. 185) –
Consonances of the notes of the lute (Ch. 5,
p. 193) – The “lima” and the quarter-tone consonance; “accidental consonance” (ch. 6, p. 201) –
extension of the scale of the lute; the fifth string
De Musica
Anno 2024 Vol. XXVIII (1) – ISSN 2465-0137

(chap. 7, p. 204) – Other types of tuning of the
lute, different from the generally accepted ones
(Ch. 8, p. 207).
Contents of the topics (lectures) in the second essay:
Tunburs; Baghdad tunbur; frets with equal
distances and frets with variable distances (Ch. 1,
p. 217) – Other tunings; fixing the “genres”
(Ch. 3, p. 242) – on this instrument (Ch. 2,
p. 226) – Khurasan tumbur (Ch. 3, p. 242) – Correspondence of the notes of the Khurasan tumbur with those of the lute (Ch. 4, p. 249) – Other
tunings (Ch. 5, p. 258) – Flutes; pitches and lows
in flutes (Ch. 6, p. 262) – Types of flutes (Ch. 7,
p. 268) – Rabab (Ch. 8, p. 277) – Other rabab tunings (Ch. 9, p. 280) – Harps (Ch. 10, p. 286).
Main ideas
The third pair of essays in the Book of Instruments (part 3) concerns musical instruments,
the first essay beginning with a brief description of what is to follow. (ibid.: 164-165). After
noting that he had already devoted two essays
to the foundations and elements of music, and
that he had already shown how these elements,
described theoretically, can be experienced by
the senses with the help of an instrument constructed for the purpose, al-Farabi proposes to
show how these elements can be experienced on
musical instruments that are actually used. At
the end of the second lecture on instruments,
he writes that in both lectures he has dealt with
the instruments that are most used in his country, showing the notes and groups of scales that
are suitable for each of them. In this way, he
addresses himself not only to other theorists
but also to the practicing musician (ibid.: 304306). He proposes to study each of the instruments and to show which ones are capable of
producing all the tones and which ones can produce only some of them. Finally, he explicitly
emphasizes the relationship between the notes
29

Ilia Mihaylov

to be produced (played on musical instruments)
and the calculations and arrangements that fall
into the previous general lecture in the Book of
Elements. Al-Farabi uses the lute to illustrate the
derivation of all the pitches in his system.
Of particular interest for our study is the
microinterval and the use of quarter tones, as
well as the instructions for their execution with
different parts of the finger. In Fig. 61 (p. 173)
it is clearly seen that the author distinguishes
five pitches between the tones C and D: C, D
flat, C sharp, D high flat, D. Similar microintervals are found on the other strings (Figs. 66–70,
pp. 187–192).
“The microintervals in Eastern music are quite
different and quite numerous, but in practice we can
be satisfied with the use of quarter tones” (ibid.:
Preface, p. ХV) – claims another great orientalist specialist – Baroness Cara de Vaux,
who wrote the preface to the cited work of
d’Erlanger.

The fourth and final pair of essays are located
in The Book of Composition (Part 4) and
deal with the musical composition of melody:
the first – mainly with rhythm, and the second –
with the different types of melodies and their
composition.
The treatment of rhythm in the first essay
is one of the difficult areas in The Great Book of
Music. The prominent German scholar Eckhard
Neubauer believes that the chapters devoted to
rhythm are an impenetrable chaparral and that
Al-Farabi himself realized or was convinced by
friends that a re-examination was necessary (Neubauer, 1968-69: 196-97)3. Al-Farabi does this in
two subsequent treatises: Ketab al-iqa at and Ketab
ehsa al-iqa at (Sawa, 1989: 20, 36-37)2.

3
See: George Sawa, FĀRĀBĪ v. Music, Encyclopædia
Iranica, http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/farabi-v (Visited
April 20, 2024).

30

In parallel with music built on rhythmic
modes, which is comparable to poetry, it has been
noted that there also existed unmeasured types
of music (unmetered), comparable to speech.
In unmetered music, the proportions of duration are not integers. It is important to note that
these musical genres still exist today in the Middle
East: unmetered music is comparable to the Persian avaz (q.v.); the Arabic maulal, layali and taksim
and the Turkish ghazal and taksim, while measured
music is comparable to the Persian tanzif, the
Arabic moulasaah and the Turkish persev and semay.
Contents of the topics (lectures) of the first essay:
Definition of melody (Ch. 1, p. 2) - Complete
and incomplete groups (Ch. 2, p. 3) - Table of
groups; consonants and dissonants (Ch. 3, p. 6) Evolution (Ch. 3, p. 6). 4, p. 18) - Rhythm (Ch. 5,
p. 26) - Basic rhythm; percussion instruments (Ch.
6, p. 27) - Generating rhythms starting from basic
rhythm (Ch. 7, p. 29) - Compound rhythms (Ch. 8,
p. 29) - Non-compound rhythms (Ch. 9, p. 31) Repeated percussion (Ch. 10, p. 34) - Additional
percussion (Ch. 11, p. 37) - Arabic traditional
rhythms (Ch. 12, p. 40) - Composing melodies
(Ch. 13, p. 49).
The discussion in the second essay deals with
musical composition, consonances and dissonances, melodic movements and rhythmic modes
used in practice, as well as specific details on
vocal and instrumental performance practice,
the relationship between language and music, the
classification of types of voices and the purpose
of music. Thanks to Farabi‘s clear description of
musical practices, we can see how much has survived to the present day (Sawa, 1981:73-86).
Contents of the topics (lectures) of the second essay:
Vocal melodies; The human voice (Ch. 1,
p. 53) - Phonemes (Ch. 2, p. 58) - Phrasing (Ch. 3,
p. 61) - Adaptation of words to music; Full and
empty notes (Ch. 4, p. 66) - Chants on blank notes
De Musica
ISSN 2465-0137 – Anno 2024, Vol. XXVIII (1)

THE GREAT BOOK OF MUSIC OF AL FARABI

(Ch. 5, p. 70) - Chants on full notes (Ch. 6, p. 75) Mixed chants (Ch. 7, p. 76) - Composite and
non-composite chants (Ch. 8, p. 77) - Composition of the vocal melody (Ch. 9, p. 79) - Beginning
and ending of a chant (Ch. 10, p. 84) - Feelings of
the melodies; their embellishments; their interrelations with the passions (Ch. 11, p. 88) - Finale of
the work (Ch. 12, p. 100).
Main ideas
Although rhythm is dealt with briefly in Book
of Elements, Farabi discusses it at length in the
first of the last pair of essays in Book of Composition (Part 4). Here he describes and classifies
the many rhythms that were common among the
Arabs of his time. The lectures also deal with
musical composition, consonances and dissonances, melodic movements and rhythmic modes
used in practice, and with specific details on vocal
and instrumental performances, the relationship
between language and music, the classification of
voice types, and the purpose of music. Thanks
to the more popular description of the musical
practices of Farabi‘s time, we can see how many
of them have survived to the present day.
At the end of the last essay of Book of Composition, Farabi summarizes what has passed,
observing that melodies „in general“ are of two
types. Melodies of the first kind simply ‚please‘
the senses, while those of the second kind are
meant/intended to affect the soul. The latter are
the ‚perfect‘ melodies (D‘Erlanger, 1935: 94-95).
Although the term ‚perfect‘ has not been used in
this context before, the twofold classification of
melodies goes back to the very opening pages of
The Great Book of Music, where Al-Farabi writes
that the term ‚melody‘ can refer either to a particular sequence of notes - or to a series of tones
that are connected by letters and words so as to
express some thought (D‘Erlanger,1930: 5-6).
The definition is then repeated and elaborated
at the beginning of the last pair of essays. Here
De Musica
Anno 2024 Vol. XXVIII (1) – ISSN 2465-0137

we read that „a melody is generally a group of notes
combined according to a certain mode of arrangement“
(D‘Erlanger, 1935: 3) and that among melodies
some of them do not fulfill an additional condition, while others join texts. Thus the phrase
‚melodies in general‘ refers to all melodies as well as
to the first of the two types of melody.
The first or general kind of melody is dealt
with in the first of the final pair of essays in the
Book of Composition, and as we have already seen,
it is in this essay that the subject of rhythm is
dealt with.
But vocal, ‚perfect‘ melodies are the sole subject of the last essay in the Big Book (p. 58). It discusses in great detail the coupling of notes and
lyrics in the composition of vocal music. Here AlFarabi discusses, for example, the tuning of measured and unmeasured texts, observing that measured texts have greater „regularity“ (ibid.: 65). He
devotes considerable attention to the creation and
structuring of the texts themselves, pointing out
that they are guided by their own principles and
constitute the art of poetry and rhetoric (ibid.: 64).
The central point about perfect melodies, however, is that their purpose is to create certain states
in the listener or to provoke the listener to certain
actions. And it is only with the help of the text that
melodies can achieve this goal, as it is manifest in
the very definition of melodies (ibid.: 95).

3. THE LIFE, WORK AND
TRANSLATION OF BARON
RUDOLF D’ERLANGER
Although less than a hundred years separate
us from the time of Rudolf d’Erlanger’s (18721932) active life, his personality and work are
little known in Bulgaria. In him we observe a
rare combination of artist, ethnomusicologist
and Arabist. To him we owe the only complete French translation of Al-Farabi’s The
Great Book of Music (Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir).
31

Ilia Mihaylov

The translation was intended to spark a renaissance of Arabic music and its study. There is
only one edition of this fundamental work,
published in Paris and included in the six volumes of La Musique arabe. The first four volumes contain translations of works from the
tenth to the sixteenth centuries, while the last
two codify the modern theory of this music.
La Musique arabe was published before and after
D’Erlanger’s death, between 1930 and 1959. It
became a major source for the study of Arabic music. D’Erlanger was also a collector, collecting musical instruments, some of which
he brought back from sub-Saharan Africa and
which later became the basis of the collection
in the Centre for Arab and Mediterranean Music,
established after his death in his own palace in
Sidi Bou Said, northern Tunisia. He also left a
library which includes all the works on Arab
music published during his era.
D’Erlanger was born in Boulogne-sur-Mer
into a wealthy family of bankers with a French and
English Catholic upbringing, and was fascinated
by the Arab world from an early age. Between
1903 and 1905 he travelled to Tunisia and Egypt
on numerous occasions to paint, and turned out
to be more of an artist than an explorer. He studied in Paris and London and chose to live in Tunis,
where he settled in 1910. In 1917, he published
his first article in the Tunisian journal De la musique
arabe en Tunisie (“On Arab music in Tunisia”). His
first musical mentor, Ahmad al-Wafi (1850-1921),
a member of the Order of Shadilya and a recognized authority on music, guided and initiated him
into the secrets of his art. This friendship began
in 1914 and ended in 1921 after the death of
Ahmad al-Wafi, who introduced D’Erlanger into
the circles of the brotherhoods, where the predominant music was of the popular màluf al-jidd
musical style. From 1924, assisted by Arab scholars and musicians, he studied Arab music intensively, translating many basic theoretical treatises.
32

D’Erlanger mentored practicing musicians.
Through Al-Wafi, he organized private concerts
that for twelve years featured performers with
different musical horizons. He contributed to the
preservation of the small instrumental ensemble
(called the jaouk) in Tunisia. D’Erlanger would
later build on and develop the ensemble by selecting each of its five members to participate in the
Cairo Congress.
In 1929 Baron D’Erlanger made a series of
recordings with the Tuareg4 in the Sahara, which
he offered to the ,,Berliner Phonogramm Archiv”.
The recordings were later registered in his name
in the German capital.
D’Erlanger began his translation of Al-Farabi’s The Great Book of Music in 1922. For this
purpose he employed Abd al-Aziz Bakkush, a
freelance translator, and Manoubi al-Sanusi, who
became his permanent private secretary. In 1923
the working plan was drawn up: the Arabic Music
would consist of treatises by al-Farabi, Safi al-Din,
and al-Laddiqi, the only missing work in the project’s abstract at the time being that of Avicenna.
Moreover, volumes 5 and 6 have not yet been
formulated, nor are they cited in the preface to
the first volume of Arab Music, which appeared
in Paris in 1930. Their exposition was later prepared at the initiative of the Cairo Congress in
1932. This international meeting influenced the
Baron’s life and redirected his plans.
This same 1930, when the first volume of
Arab Music was published in Paris, was decisive
for D’Erlanger. From that moment on, his name
remained forever linked to that of Al-Farabi and
settled firmly in the field of Middle Eastern music
studies. Moreover, D’Erlanger also necessitated

4
The Tuareg are an African semi-nomadic people, inhabiting
mainly the Sahara Desert in a vast territory stretching from far
southwest Libya to the southern part of Algeria, Niger, Mali and
Burkina Faso. Small groups of Tuareg are also found in northern
Nigeria. They are traditionally engaged in cattle breeding, and
have converted to Islam.

De Musica
ISSN 2465-0137 – Anno 2024, Vol. XXVIII (1)

THE GREAT BOOK OF MUSIC OF AL FARABI

a rethinking of previously known paradigms and
theoretical uncertainties, and it was in this work
that he questioned all previously known data on
this music. In January 1931, Rudolf d’Erlanger
responded to the personal invitation of King Fuad
I of Egypt and had to travel to Cairo, where he
stayed for a month. He was informally commissioned to prepare the congress devoted to Arab
music held in Cairo in 1932. During his stay in
Cairo, the Baron met Ali Darwish, whose reputation was already established and his professional
skills unquestioned. Later, during the six months
he spent at the Baron’s home in Sidi Bou Said,
Ali Darwish’s mission consisted mainly in writing
several papers, including one on rhythms, which
was published in Arabic under the name of Baron
D’Erlanger in a book that included the papers presented at the Cairo Congress in both the Arabic
and French versions of the proceedings. By this
time the Baron’s health was deteriorating. Rudolf
d’Erlanger died, probably of tuberculosis or bronchial disease, on 29 October 1932.5

4. DISCUSSION
According to Al-Farabi‘s teachings, the art of
music is divided into two areas - „theoretical“,
which is a speculative science and studies its (the art
of music‘s) foundations and principles, and „practical“, which is empirically derived and reflects lived
practice. These two fields complement each other
and only together are perceived as music. The term
mysuka has therefore been interpreted in two ways:
as a set of playable and composed melodies, and as
a science which ‚consists in the study of kinds of melodies; what they are composed of; why they are composed; what
should be done so that their effect may penetrate more deeply
and touch more powerfully‘.
5
For the biographical notes, I have used data from “Le Baron
Rudolf d’Erlanger” (1872–1932), the Artist and the Savant”
by Christian Poché and Jean Lambert. https://www.amarfoundation.org/le-baron-rudolf-derlanger/

De Musica
Anno 2024 Vol. XXVIII (1) – ISSN 2465-0137

The power and appeal of Al-Farby‘s Great Book
of Music as a scientific theory lies precisely in its
applicability to music of the most varied and different kinds and origins. The assumptions and paradigms discussed in it can be extrapolated to a variety of musical practices beyond the confines of
the Arab world. Of interest to musicologists studying ancient Greece or medieval Europe, its terminology, concepts, and methodological approach
have had a lasting influence on later music theorists, whether Arab, Persian, or Turkish. Moreover,
because of the strong continuity in the musical traditions of the Middle East from the Middle Ages
to the modern era, al-Farabi‘s writings continue to
offer useful models for the analysis of music in the
region today.
In conclusion, the Great Book of Music (‚Kitab
al-Musiqa al-Kabir‘) is of the utmost importance
for the Middle East. It discusses various aspects
of the art of music, describes the construction
of the maqams prevalent at the time, presents the
philosophical principles of Arab musical culture and discusses its cosmic qualities. Despite
al-Farabi‘s notion that music borrowed some of
its principles from mathematics, he distinguishes
himself from the Pythagoreans, who did not recognize the „authority of the ear“ in the field of
the perception of sounds. Pythagoras and his
school accepted only calculations and measurements as the starting point of their reasoning,
while Al-Farabi insisted that musical performance
and hearing were the best judges for determining certain theoretical propositions, even when
this sometimes contradicted certain mathematical calculations. He also noted that music theory
emerged much later than practical art and was
accordingly based on data from musical practice.
In short, the theoretical art of music is a form
of thinking that knows the tunes; the converse
thesis is unprovable.
However, more work is needed to clarify a significant number of obscure or ambiguous passages
33

Ilia Mihaylov

in the book. Part of the problem is inherent in
the subject itself - music is a non-verbal art and
Al-Farabi resorts to many disciplines to express his
thoughts. It is therefore inevitable that the modern reader is familiar with these disciplines in their
tenth-century context, and should be equally aware
that the author of the Great Book of Music sometimes borrows technical terms freely from particular sciences and applies them to music, not infrequently distorting their meaning or adding freely to
their original meaning.

LITERATURE:
Azza 1992: Azza, Abd al-Hamid Madian.
“Language-Music Relationships in Al-Faraba’s
Grand book of music,” Ph.D. diss., Cornell University, 1992.
D’Erlanger 1930: D’Erlanger, Rodolphe. La Musique arabe, Vol. 1. Librarie Orientaliste Paul
Geuthner. Paris, 1930.
D’Erlanger 1935: D’Erlanger, Rodolphe. La Musique arabe, Vol. 2. Librarie Orientaliste Paul
Geuthner. Paris, 1935.
Farmer 1965: Farmer, Henry. The Sources of
Arabian Music. Leiden, E.J. Brill, 1965.
Khallikan Ibn. 1868: Khallikan Ibn. (tr. de Slane).
Biographical Dictionary.Vol. 3. Paris, Oriental
Translation Fund of Great Britan and Irland, 1868.
Sawa 1981: Sawa, George. The Survival of
Some Aspects of Medieval Arabic Performance
Practice. – Ethnomusicology, 25/1, University
of Illinois Press, 1981.
Sawa 1983-1984: Sawa, George. Al-Farabi’s Theory of the Iqa: An Empirically Derived Medieval
Model of Rhythmic Analysis. – Selected Reports
in Ethnomusicology, UCLA, Los Angeles, 11/9,
1983-1984.

34

Sawa 1980: Sawa, George. Music Performance
Practice in the Early’Abbasid Era, 132-320 AH /
750-932 AD. Toronto, 1980.
Sawa 1990: Sawa, George. Paradigms in al-Farabi’s Musical Writings. – In: “Paradigms in Medieval Thought: Applications in Medieval Disciplines “. Medieval Studies, Vol. 3. Lewiston,
Edwin Melem Press, 1990.
Amnon 1979: Amnon, Shiloah. The Theory
of Music in Arabic Writings (р. 900–1900):
Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in
Libraries of Europe and the U.S.A. Munich, G.
Henle Verlag, 1979.

WEB:
George Sawa, “FĀRĀBĪ v. Music,” Encyclopædia
Iranica, accessed April 25, 2024, http://www.
iranicaonline.org/articles/farabi-v.
Christian Poché, Jean Lambert „Le Baron Rudolf
d’Erlanger (1872-1932), the Artist and the Savant “,
accessed March 15, 2024, https://www.amar-foundation.org/le-baron-rudolf-derlanger/.

NOTES:
1.
The known manuscripts and editions of the Great Music
Book (Ketāb al-mūsīqī al-kabīr) are:
MSS Istanbul, Süleymaniye Kütüphanesi, Ragıp Paşa, no. 876;
Köprülü, no. 953;
MS Leiden, Universitätsbibliothek, Or. 651;
MS Madrid, Bibliotheca Nacional, Res. 241;
MS Milan, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, no. 289;
MS Princeton, N.J., University Library, Garrett 1984; ed. Ḡaṭṭās
ʿAbd-al-Malek Ḵašaba (with revisions and introduction by M. A.
Hefnī), Cairo, 1967 (in Arabic); tr. R. d’Erlanger as Grand traité de la
musique: Kitābu’ l-Mūsīqī al-Kabīr, La Musique arabe, 2 vols., Paris,
1930-35 (in French).
2.
In these two treatises, Al-Farabi perfected his theory of
rhythm and his system of rhythmic notation. He developed general
formulas, calling them the foundations, and codified sixteen modern ornamental techniques that modify and embellish rhythms and
allow for an infinite number of rhythmic variations. Of particular
value are his notated examples of rhythms in their basic and ornamented forms, as well as the meticulous inscriptions placed under
the notated examples, which explain the arrangement of the basic
rhythmic attacks and the ornamental additions.

De Musica
ISSN 2465-0137 – Anno 2024, Vol. XXVIII (1)

